
                        How to do a GIMP release
                      ----------------------------
                  a check-list for doing a GIMP release


 ( ) Check that you have working ssh access to ftp.gimp.org and that you
     are a member of the ftp group.

 ( ) Check that ftp.gimp.org has enough space to upload the release and to
     place it into the FTP area. If not, make place or ask Yosh to do that.

 ( ) Check that you have admin access to the GIMP product on
     bugzilla.gimp.org and to the news section on www.gimp.org, or that
     someone can do the changes for you.

 ( ) Make sure the checkout is up to date, clean from uncommitted changes.

 ( ) Check that the version number is correct in configure.ac

 ( ) Run 'make maintainer-clean -k' or 'git clean -x -d -f'

 ( ) Run ./autogen.sh --enable-gtk-doc

 ( ) Do a complete build of the source tree.

 ( ) Check if NEWS, authors.xml, README or INSTALL need to be updated,
     as well as any release notes on gimp.org. Don't forget to add any
     "Index of new symbols in GIMP 2.x" to the gtk-doc generated
     devel-docs.

 ( ) Does the splash screen need to be changed?

 ( ) Run 'make distcheck'. Avoid passing make -j since that can cause
     mysterious fails

 ( ) If there are problems with 'make distcheck', fix them and try again.

 ( ) Commit changes that you had to do to get 'make distcheck' running.

 ( ) Make a release commit so that a release entry is added to the
     generated ChangeLog.

 ( ) Run 'make dist' to create the final tarball. This will generate
     ChangeLog.

 ( ) Use md5sum to create a checksum of the tarball (tar.bz2).

 ( ) Upload the tarball (tar.bz2) and the .md5 file to your home directory
     on ftp.gimp.org.  Keep a copy of the .md5 file around.

 ( ) Commit the changes to generated files that were changed by
     running 'make dist'.

 ( ) Tag the release (don't forget to push the tag)
        git tag -s GIMP_2_x_y

 ( ) Move the tarball and the .md5 file to its final destination in the
     FTP area (/home/ftp/pub/gimp/v2.x).

 ( ) Update the 0.0_LATEST-IS- file in the directory on the FTP server.

 ( ) Change permissions of the new files to make them writable by the 'ftp'
     group. This will allow other members of this group to correct mistakes
     and to update the 0.0_LATEST-IS- file next time.

 ( ) Add the new version to the GIMP product on bugzilla.gimp.org.

 ( ) Check out or update the 'gimp-web' module and change
     downloads/index.htrw.  Commit this change, the web server should
     then update itself soon (usually less than an hour).

 ( ) Bump the version number in configure.ac and commit this change.

 ( ) Grab a properly chilled beverage and enjoy yourself.

 ( ) Give the mirrors a reasonably long time to update, then announce the
     release on gimp.org and on the GIMP mailing lists (don't forget
     gimp-announce).
